          MINNEAPOLIS ARTCC/ROCHESTER APPROACH/ATCT

                                LETTER OF AGREEMENT

                                                                            EFFECTIVE: December 27, 2023

SUBJECT: TERMINAL AREA CONTROL SERVICE

1. PURPOSE. This agreement governs approach control service within airspace delegated to
Rochester Tower and is supplementary to procedures contained in Air Traffic Handbooks.

2. CANCELLATION. vZMP ZMP-Minor ATCT/TRACON LOA, Rochester (RST)
ATCT/TRACAB, dated 1/1/2015, is cancelled.

3. ALTITUDE DEFINITION. All altitudes in this letter of agreement are expressed in terms of
feet MSL.

4. RESPONSIBILITIES. During published hours of operation, Rochester Tower is delegated
the responsibility for the control of IFR and special VFR aircraft in the area depicted on
Attachment "A" of this agreement.

5. RADAR PROCEDURES. Unless otherwise coordinated, the following procedures shall
apply:

    A. Rochester Approach Area Arrivals.

         (1) The clearance limit for arrivals must be the destination airport.

         (2) Arrivals at or above 10,000 must be descending to or level at 10,000, with the
             exception of arrivals over Waterloo Approach must be descending to or level at
             11,000.

         (3) Rochester Approach may descend and/or alter the route of flight of an arrival by no
             more than 30 degrees either side of the aircraft's heading provided the change does
             not affect another Center sector or Approach Control. Approach may issue the
             descent at pilot's discretion.

         (4) When automated handoffs are used:

             (a) Acceptance of a handoff by Rochester Approach of an aircraft in level flight
                  constitutes altitude approval for Mode C equipped aircraft. This does not
                  constitute approval for wrong altitude for direction of flight.

             (b) The altitude of arrivals with no Mode C readout must be coordinated at or prior to
                  handoff.

    B. Departures.

         (1) Upon leaving 5,000, the Center may alter an aircraft's heading up to 30 degrees either
             side of course and/or climb to a higher altitude, provided the change does not affect
             another center sector or another approach control.
         (2) En route departure clearance to aircraft departing airports within Rochester
             Approach's delegated airspace may be issued without Center approval provided the
             following conditions are met:

             (a) Departures requesting an altitude at or below Rochester Approach's vertical limits
                  must be cleared to their requested altitude. Departures requesting a higher altitude
                  must be cleared to 9,000, or 15,000 as appropriate;

                  1. When Rochester Approach departures into ZMP Sector 05 filed above 15,000
                      feet require a point out to ZMP Sector 21, Sector 05 is responsible for making
                      the point out to Sector 21.

    C. MSP Arrivals.

         (1) If a turbo jet filed to MSP is handed off to ZMP sector 7 then assign the BLUEM
             STAR to all RNAV capable turbojet aircraft. Assign the KASPR STAR to all non-
             RNAV turbojet aircraft.

             NOTE ­ If RST points out the aircraft to ZMP sector 07, RST must verbally
             coordinate with M98 all turbojet aircraft on the KASPR STAR.

         (2) M98 area turbo prop arrivals at or above 10,000 that will not transition the 15,000-
             foot shelf will be at or descending to 10,000. All aircraft filed through the lateral
             limits of the shelf at or above 14,000 will be at or descending to 14,000. All other
             aircraft will be at their flight plan altitude.

         (3) Rochester Approach may have control for descent of M98 Turbo Prop arrivals when
             the aircraft is within 10 miles of the Approach boundary.

    D. M98 Departures.

         (1) For all M98 area departures filed for 15,000 or below, climbing to requested altitude
             is approved by Rochester Approach without further coordination.

    E. MCW Traffic.

         (1) Rochester Approach releases control for descent and turns of ±30 degrees on those
             aircraft landing MCW.

         (2) Rochester Approach approves aircraft departing MCW climbing to the requested
             altitude posted on the Flight Progress Strip.

6. GENERAL.

    A. Approach must inform departures restricted to altitudes below their requested altitude, to
         expect further clearance to their filed altitude 10 minutes after departure.

    B. During the time period when Rochester Approach/Tower is not operational, delegated
         airspace and control responsibility therein shall revert to the Center, Sector 07.

ZMP/RST LOA  2
7. ATTACHMENT.
         Attachment "A" ­ Rochester Approach Delegated Airspace

Dhruv Kalra
Air Traffic Manager
VATSIM Minneapolis ARTCC

ZMP/RST LOA  3
Attachment A:

ZMP/RST LOA    4
