SUBJ: SUN FCT Standard Operating Procedures

  This document establishes the Hailey/Sun Valley/Friedman Memorial Airport Federal Contract

Control Tower (SUN FCT) Standard Operating Procedures within the Salt Lake City ARTCC on VATSIM

(vZLC). Controllers are required to be familiar with the provisions of this document and to exercise their

best judgment if they encounter situations not covered by it. The provisions and procedures described

herein are supplemental to vZLC Facility Policy and FAA Order JO 7110.65.

  The information contained herein is to be used for flight simulation purposes only on the VATSIM

network. It is not intended, nor should it be used for real-world navigation. The Virtual Salt Lake City

ARTCC is not affiliated with the FAA, the actual Salt Lake City ARTCC, or any governing aviation body.

Cameron Negrete
Air Traffic Manager
Salt Lake City ARTCC

Adam Earl
Facilities Engineer
Salt Lake City ARTCC
Version           Record of Changes      Effective Date Issued By

7110.13A           Description           Mar 20, 2026  AE

          Initial Release In New Format

          Not for real world use.
                                  Table of Contents

Chapter 1. Standard Operating Control Procedures           1

Section 1. Introduction                                    1

1-1-1. Purpose                                             1

1-1-2. Audience                                            1

1-1-3. Distribution                                        1

1-1-4. Cancellation                                        1

1-1-5. Special Information About Hailey Airport            1

Section 2. Operational Positions                           2

Section 3. Intrafacility Coordination Procedures           3

1-3-1. Runway Configurations                               3

1-3-2. Changing Runway Configurations                      3

1-3-3. ATIS                                                3

Section 4. Opposite Direction Operations (ODO)             4

1-4-1. General                                             4

1-4-2. Responsibilities                                    4

1-4-3. IFR Aircraft Procedures                             4

1-4-4. VFR Aircraft Procedures                             5

Chapter 2. Operational Positions                           6

Section 1. Ground Control (GC)                             6

2-1-1. Position Responsibilities                           6

2-1-2. Area of Jurisdiction                                6

2-1-3. IFR Departure Instructions                          6

2-1-4. VFR Departure Instructions                          6

2-1-5. VFR FF Departure Instructions                       7

2-1-6. Traffic Flow                                        7

2-1-7. ATIS                                                7

2-1-8. Pushback Clearances                                 7

Section 2. Local Control (LC)                              8

2-2-1. Position Responsibilities                           8

2-2-2. Area of Jurisdiction                                8

2-2-3. Departures                                          8

2-2-4. Approaches/Arrivals                                 8

2-2-5. Tower Procedures                                    9

2-2-6. Center Coordination                                 9

Appendix 1: Tower Airspace                                 10

Appendix 2: Airport Terrain Environment                    11

Appendix 3: WOOD RIVER VFR DEP                             12

                                  Not for real world use.
              Chapter 1. Standard Operating Control Procedures

                                      Section 1. Introduction

1-1-1. Purpose
This document establishes the Hailey/Sun Valley/Friedman Memorial Airport Federal Contract
Control Tower (SUN FCT) Standard Operating Procedures within the Salt Lake City ARTCC on
VATSIM (vZLC).

1-1-2. Audience
All vZLC controllers and visitors contained within the vZLC and VATUSA roster.

1-1-3. Distribution
This document is authorized for unrestricted use and release and is available in the Resources
Section of the vZLC Website.

1-1-4. Cancellation
This document cancels the SUN FD, effective August 6, 2025.

1-1-5. Special Information About Hailey Airport
    a. Friedman Memorial Airport is located in the Rocky Mountains of south central Idaho. The
         airport is in a narrow valley, just north of a large plain. It is surrounded by high terrain
         with the highest mountains to the north. The Smoky Mountain Range is to the west, and
         the Pioneer Mountain Range is to the east. Magic Reservoir is near the Big Wood River
         Valley entrance, 12 NM to the southwest. To the east-northeast, terrain rises to 8324 feet
         MSL within 3 NM. To the west, Kelly Mountain rises to 8856 feet MSL within 7 NM.
    b. The higher landing minimums and special missed approach procedures are designed to
         allow for clearance of high terrain near the airport.
    c. Windshear may be encountered, especially during periods of high wind conditions along
         with the use of runways not based on winds but normalcy.

Not for real world use.                    1
                                Section 2. Operational Positions

                           Table 1-2-1. SUN FCT Operational Positions Table

   Sector/Position           STARS ID  VATSIM Callsign                         Frequency
Ground Control (GC)              N/A       SUN_GND                               121.700
                                                                                 125.600
 Local Control (LC)            N/A       SUN_TWR

                             Bold designates a primary position.

Not for real world use.                                                                   2
                    Section 3. Intrafacility Coordination Procedures

1-3-1. Runway Configurations
The active runway configuration refers to the general cardinal direction of departures and
arrivals currently in use. Authorized runway configurations are listed in subparagraphs c. and d.

    a. When selecting a runway configuration, the following factors must be considered:
              (1) Standard Runway Config
              (2) Terrain And Visibility
              (3) Wind speed. The gust factor takes precedence over the constant wind speed.

    b. Runway 31 is the designated landing runway at all times except for times of extreme
         wind but clear skies to allow for circling approaches (RNAV-Y) or (NDB-B).

    c. Runway 13 is the designated departure runway and is to be used at all times, IFR
         departures off of runway 31 are not authorized at any point in time.

1-3-2. Changing Runway Configurations
The Local Control (LC) position is the final authority for selecting the runway configuration, but
coordination with GC and SLC CTR must be accomplished prior to changing the runway
configuration.

    a. LC must:
              (1) Coordinate with GC to determine which aircraft will be the last departure and
                   arrival in the old runway configuration.
              (2) Ensure that:
                        (a) The ATIS is updated to reflect the runway configuration change.
                        (b) Runway 31 is not used for IFR departures at any time
                        (c) Visibility permits use of Runway 13 for landing if necessary.
              (3) Notify ZLC ARTCC Sectors 31 and 41 (or other appropriate overlying sector) of
                   the runway configuration change.

1-3-3. ATIS
Regardless of the position broadcasting the ATIS, the following statements must be included on
the ATIS broadcast:

    a. During VFR weather conditions: "DEPARTING VFR AIRCRAFT ADVISE GROUND
         CONTROL OF REQUESTED HEADING OR DESTINATION."

    b. When the outside air temperature is 26°C or greater: "CHECK DENSITY ALTITUDE."

         NOTE-
         This statement must be made immediately after stating the altimeter setting.

Not for real world use.                    3
                    Section 4. Opposite Direction Operations (ODO)

1-4-1. General
Opposite Direction Operations consist of IFR/VFR operations conducted to the same or parallel
runway where an aircraft is operating in a reciprocal direction of another aircraft arriving,
departing, or conducting an approach. This is standard practice here at Hailey!

NOTE-
Departing aircraft include aircraft conducting a touch-and-go, stop-and-go, low approach,
missed approach, or go-around.

1-4-2. Responsibilities
    a. LC is responsible for applying the cutoff point between opposite direction arriving and
         departing aircraft.
    b. SLC CTR (Sector 31) is responsible for applying the cutoff point between opposite
         direction arrival aircraft.

1-4-3. IFR Aircraft Procedures
    a. General:
              (1) Traffic advisories must be issued to all ODO aircraft.

                   PHRASEOLOGY-
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC (distance) MILE FINAL, (type aircraft).
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC DEPARTING RUNWAY (number), (type
                   aircraft).
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC (position), (type aircraft).

              (2) VFR aircraft conducting practice approaches may or may not receive IFR
                   services.

              (3) Opposite direction, same or parallel runway, operations with opposing traffic
                   inside the cutoff point are allowed with visual/tower applied separation.

              (4) Lateral separation must exist before any other type of separation is applied.
    b. Coordination:

              (1) LC does not need to verbally request opposite direction departures with CTR.
              (2) CTR does not need to verbally request opposite direction arrivals with LC.
    c. Cutoff procedures for aircraft conducting ODO to the same runway:
              (1) A departing aircraft must be airborne and have turned to avoid conflict prior to an

                   aircraft reaching:
                        (a) A point five flying miles from the threshold of the runway of intended
                             landing or, if an aircraft is established in the traffic pattern, prior to that
                             aircraft turning base leg.
                        (b) If the above conditions are not met, action must be taken to ensure
                             control instructions are issued to protect the integrity of the cutoff points.

              (2) An arriving aircraft must cross the runway threshold prior to an aircraft reaching:

Not for real world use.                    4
                        (a) A point five flying miles from the threshold of the runway of intended
                             landing or, if an aircraft is established in the traffic pattern, prior to that
                             aircraft turning base leg.

                        (b) If the above conditions are not met, action must be taken to ensure
                             control instructions are issued to protect the integrity of the cutoff points.

    d. Cutoff procedures for aircraft conducting ODO to parallel runways:
              (1) Provide a turn away from the opposing arriving traffic before the arrival is inside
                   of the cutoff point to the other runway. The same cutoff points in subparagraph c.
                   must apply.

NOTE-
1. Visual separation of any type may be applied after the turn away from opposing traffic is
issued.
2. Prior to a pilot providing visual separation, a heading with at least 15° angular difference
between the aircraft's flight paths must be assigned to ensure flight paths do not cross.

1-4-4. VFR Aircraft Procedures
    a. Ensure VFR aircraft are issued and are aware of traffic to avoid conflict with the
         opposing IFR/VFR traffic.
    b. LC must issue traffic information to both aircraft and indicate the direction that the
         departure will turn (arrival/departure ODO) or the location of the opposing aircraft on final
         (arrival/arrival ODO).

Not for real world use.                    5
                           Chapter 2. Operational Positions

                               Section 1. Ground Control (GC)

2-1-1. Position Responsibilities
    a. Monitor the GC frequency (121.700 MHz).
    b. Prepare, update, and mark flight progress strips in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip
         Handling Directive (7210.3).
    c. Issue departure clearances to IFR aircraft, complying with posted traffic management
         initiatives (TMIs), letters of agreement (LOAs), and published preferred routes.
    d. Handle VFR departure aircraft in accordance with paragraphs 2-1-4 and 2-1-5.
    e. Ensure all taxiing aircraft have the current ATIS.
    f. Determine/finalize aircraft departure runway assignments.
    g. Assume other ground control or other cab responsibilities, as assigned.

2-1-2. Area of Jurisdiction
GC has jurisdiction of all movement areas except active runways.

2-1-3. IFR Departure Instructions
Departing IFR aircraft must be assigned the following:

    a. In All Configs
             i. All RNAV-capable aircraft
                        1. Issue FLIYN SID
            ii. All Non-RNAV aircraft:
                        1. Issue RWY 13 ODP
                        2. A VCOA may be approved when specifically requested by the pilot

    b. An initial altitude of 15,000 feet, or lower cruising altitude if compliant with the MOCA.

NOTE-
Departure headings are not authorized, as terrain constraints do not allow for it.

NOTE-
AUREL SID is valid until 3/26/2026, aircraft may use/be assigned this RNAV SID until then.

NOTE-
Every attempt will be made to route all IFR departures on an approved SID appropriate for their
route of flight. Aircraft unable/refusing to accept a SID will be assigned Runway 13 ODP.

2-1-4. VFR Departure Instructions
Departing VFR aircraft have the ability to fly the published VFR departure:

    a. A pilot may request: WOOD RIVER VISUAL DEP
             i. You are required to abide by this request if operationally safe.

Not for real world use.                                                                            6
2-1-5. VFR FF Departure Instructions
All VFR aircraft that requested flight following and will depart the Class D surface area must:

    a. Be issued both of the following:
              (1) Appropriate departure frequency.
              (2) Discrete beacon code.

    b. Have the following filled out:
              (1) Flight Strip, in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip Handling Directive (7210.3).
              (2) Flight Plan.

NOTE-
Aircraft that depart the Class D surface area and are not requesting flight following are not to
have any of the above, except a filled out Half Strip.

2-1-6. VFR Arrival Instructions
SUN Local may change VFR arrival aircraft to runway 13. This is generally done by telling VFR
planes to remain over or East of the ridge and to enter a left downwind for Runway 13.

PHRASEOLOGY-
ENTER LEFT DOWN RUNWAY 13. REMAIN OVER OR EAST OF THE RIDGE

2-1-7. Traffic Flow
GC must ensure all aircraft yield to aircraft exiting a runway, unless otherwise coordinated with
LC.

2-1-8. ATIS
Ensure all departure aircraft have the current ATIS. If you have the VATIS BETA you're
encouraged to use Voice Recorded ATIS mode over the Automated Mode as this airport is not
listed as a D-ATIS airport.

2-1-9. Pushback Clearances
All Aircraft are required to receive pushback clearance before pushing back off the terminal onto
taxiway B.

Not for real world use.                    7
                                 Section 2. Local Control (LC)

2-2-1. Position Responsibilities
    a. Monitor the LC frequency (125.600 MHz).
    b. Provide control instructions to aircraft within the LC area of jurisdiction.
    c. Determine the appropriate runway configuration in accordance with paragraph 1-3-1.
    d. Sequence and separate departures and arrivals.
    e. Mark FPSs in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip Handling Directive (7210.3).
    f. Assume other local control or other cab responsibilities, as assigned.

2-2-2. Area of Jurisdiction
LC has jurisdiction of the following:

    a. LC airspace, as depicted in Appendix 1.
    b. Runway 13/31

2-2-3. Departures
    a. IFR Departure Notification / Releases
             i. A "Release Request" (.RR) is required to be sent to the appropriate Departure
                   Controller for all departing aircraft in accordance with the General Control
                   Directive.
            ii. Release requests may also be verbally coordinated.
    b. VFR aircraft to unicom, unless the VFR has requested Flight Following and those go to
         the appropriate departure frequency.
    c. Main Departure Frequency
             i. Salt Lake Center (Sector 31) 118.050.
    d. Runway Usage
             i. Runway 13 is the only runway to be used for departures, if the weather doesn't
                   allow for safe departures on Runway 13 (Example: 30 Knot Winds Out Of The
                   North), aircraft must be held until conditions improve.

2-2-4. Approaches/Arrivals
    a. Non-FAA Published Approaches
             i. At Hailey and other smaller airports with complex procedures some airlines and
                   operators pay to have a specific approach made for them with lower minimums,
                   better performance for their aircraft and other reasons. If a pilot requests such an
                   approach, you must get the IAF/IF, FAF and the altitudes for them to allow the
                   aircraft to use the approach.
    a. Missed Approach/Go Around
             i. Send a Missed Notification (.MA) for the aircraft executing an unplanned Missed
                   Approach/Go Around to the appropriate Center sector that will be receiving the
                   aircraft for re-sequencing.
            ii. The following is considered a Primary Climb-Out procedure and does not require
                   any special coordination with Center or Strip marking other than the basic Missed
                   Notification. Aircraft must not turn prior to the departure end of the runway.

Not for real world use.                    8
                   Handoff/Comm-Change to the appropriate Center sector must be completed no
                   later than 1 mile off the departure end of the runway.

    b. Climb Out Procedure:
             i. Fly Published Missed Approach.
            ii. Otherwise Follow The Valley On Heading 320, Climb and Maintain 12,000.

    c. VFR traffic joins the local pattern.

2-2-5. Tower Procedures
    a. LAHSO.
             i. Not authorized.
    b. Tower Use of Radar:
             i. None.

2-2-6. Center Coordination
Salt Lake Center may provide radar traffic calls for Sun Valley Local control and will coordinate
them via discord landline. Sun valley tower shall then relay the radar traffic call to the aircraft via
the following phraseology.

         PHRASEOLOGY
         "Salt Lake Center advises traffic is at your <direction> and <distance>...."

Not for real world use.                    9
                             Appendix 1: Tower Airspace

Not for real world use.                                      

10
                         Appendix 2: Airport Terrain Environment

Not for real world use.                                             

11
                           Appendix 3: WOOD RIVER VFR DEP

Not for real world use.                                      

12
