                          VATSIM MINNEAPOLIS CENTER/FARGO TOWER
                                         LETTER OF AGREEMENT
                                                                                 EFFECTIVE: January 17, 2021

SUBJECT: Terminal Area Control Service
1. PURPOSE. This agreement governs approach control airspace within airspace delegated to

    Fargo Tower and is supplementary to procedures contained in Air Traffic Control Handbooks.

2. CANCELATION. ZMP ­ Minor ATCT/TRACON LOA, "Fargo (FAR) ATCT/TRACON."

3. RESPONSIBILITY. Fargo Tower has been delegated responsibility for control of IFR and
    Special VFR aircraft at 10,000 feet MSL and below within Minneapolis Center's airspace as
    depicted on Attachment "A". The airspace northwest of Detroit Lakes, at and below 4,000 feet
    MSL, is retained by Minneapolis Center for IFR approaches into Detroit Lakes. The 4,000-foot
    shelf is depicted by "hash marks" on Attachment "A."

4. RADAR/CENRAP PROCEDURES. Unless otherwise coordinated, the following procedures
    shall apply:

    a. Arrivals/Over flights.

         1. The clearance limit for arrivals shall be the destination airport.

         2. Arrivals shall be descending to or level at 8,000 feet MSL with the following
             exception: Arrivals from the north over Grand Forks Approach Control's airspace shall
             be descending to or level at 11,000 feet MSL, unless otherwise coordinated.

         3. When automated handoffs are in use:
                  a. Acceptance of a handoff by Approach Control of an over flight aircraft with
                      Mode C readout in level flight at or below 10,000 feet MSL constitutes altitude
                      approval.

                  b. The altitude of non-mode C arrival aircraft at and below 10,000 feet MSL shall
                      be manually coordinated.

         4. Approach control may descend and/or alter an arrival's route of flight no more than 30
             degrees either side of the aircraft's heading, provided the following conditions are met:

                  a. The arrival must be within 10 miles of the lateral limits of Approach Control's
                      airspace.

                  b. The alteration of course or altitude shall not affect Grand Fork's approach
                      Control without coordination.

         5. Manual radar handoffs shall be made with reference to FAR VORTAC or other
             commonly displayed radar fixes.
ZMP/FAR ATCT LOA                                                                           2

b. Departures.

1. En route departure clearance to aircraft departing airports within Approach Control's
    delegated airspace may be issued without Center approval provided the following
    conditions are met:

a. Departures are cleared at 10,000 feet MSL or below.

b. Inform departures restricted to altitudes below their requested altitude to "expect
    (filed altitude) 10 minutes after departure."

2. When automated or manual handoffs are used, the Approach Control shall issue FL230
    or the requested altitude, whichever is lower, to departures after the Center has
    accepted the handoff. The Center shall, before accepting the handoff, advise Approach
    Control verbally when an altitude different from that stated above is to be assigned.

3. After leaving 8,000 feet MSL, the Center shall have control of departures for turns up
    to 30 degrees either side of course.

Dhruv Kalra
Air Traffic Manager
VATSIM Minneapolis ARTCC
ZMP/FAR ATCT LOA  3
