MINNEAPOLIS ARTCC/SIOUX FALLS TOWER

                                        LETTER OF AGREEMENT
                                                                                 Effective: September 10, 2022

SUBJECT: Terminal Area Control Service
1. PURPOSE. This letter of agreement governs approach control service within airspace

    delegated to Sioux Falls Tower and is supplementary to procedures contained in Air Traffic
    Handbooks.
2. CANCELLATION. vZMP Minor ATCT/TRACON LOA, "Sioux Falls (FSD)
    ATCT/TRACON"
3. RESPONSIBILITIES. During published hours of operation, Sioux Falls Tower is delegated
    responsibility for control of IFR and Special VFR aircraft in the area depicted on Attachment
    "A" at and below 10,000 feet MSL.
4. PROCEDURES. Unless otherwise coordinated, the following procedures shall apply:
    a. Arrivals.

         1) The clearance limit fix for arrivals shall be the destination airport.
         2) Arrivals shall be descending to or level at 8,000 feet MSL, except when a higher

             altitude is required for separation of traffic (example: multiple arrivals).
             a) Arriving traffic from over Sioux City Approach Control delegated airspace shall

                  be descending to 11,000 feet MSL.
         3) After receiving a radar handoff and frequency change from Minneapolis Center,

             Sioux Falls Approach Control may descending and/or alter an arrival's route of flight.
             The maximum turn shall not exceed 30 degrees either side of the aircraft's
             heading/route. Either or both of these actions shall not be initiated if the results will
             affect another sector or approach control facility.
         4) When automated handoffs are used:
             a) Acceptance of a handoff by approach control of an aircraft with Mode C readout,

                  in level flight at or below 10,000 feet MSL, constitutes altitude approval.
             b) The altitude of arrivals with no Mode C shall be coordinated at or prior to

                  handoff.
    b. Departures.

         1) After receiving a handoff from Sioux Falls Approach Control, Minneapolis Center
             may alter a departure's heading and/or route. The maximum turn shall not exceed 30
             degrees either side of the aircraft's heading/route. This action shall not be initiated if
             the result will affect another sector or approach control facility.

                                     FOR SIMULATION USE ONLY
ZMP/FSD LOA                                                                                        2

         2) When automated handoffs are used, Sioux Falls Approach Control shall issue the
             requested altitude or FL230 (whichever is lower) to departures after the Center has
             accepted the handoff. The Center shall, before accepting a handoff, advise Approach
             Control verbally when an altitude different from the requested altitude is to be
             assigned.

         3) Minneapolis Center Sectors 33 and 37 shall accomplish all necessary coordination,
             for aircraft climbing above 10,000 feet MSL, prior to acceptance of a radar handoff.

5. GENERAL.

    a. The Tower shall:

         1) Assign Center Frequencies as depicted on Attachment "A".

         2) Inform departures restricted to altitudes below their requested altitude to, "Expect
             (filed altitude) 10 minutes after departure."

         3) Accomplish required coordination if a transfer of control has been made and/or the
             route is changed to affect a Center sector.

    b. Accomplish required coordination for arrivals which cross Center sector boundaries
         within Center altitudes.

6. ATTACHMENTS.

Attachment "A" Sioux Falls Approach Control Area

             FOR SIMULATION USE ONLY
ZMP/FSD LOA                           3

             FOR SIMULATION USE ONLY
