                            OPERATIONAL LETTER OF AGREEMENT
                                                     Between

                 MINNEAPOLIS AIR ROUTE TRAFFIC CONTROL CENTER
                                                        and

                          BISMARCK AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWER
                                           Effective: 4 August 2020

I. Purpose:
         This agreement governs procedures between Minneapolis ARTCC (ZMP) and Bismarck
         ATCT (BIS) on the VATSIM Network. This agreement is supplemental to each facilities
         Standard Operating Procedures and policies, FAAO 7110.65, VATSIM Code of Conduct,
         VATSIM Code of Regulations, VATSIM User Agreement, and applicable division
         policies.

II. Cancellation:
         This LOA cancels any and all previous LOAs between ZMP and BIS prior to the above
         effective date.

III. Responsibilities:
         During published hours of operation, Bismarck Tower is delegated control responsibility
         for IFR and SVFR aircraft at 15,000 feet MSL and below within the confines of the
         airspace depicted on Attachment "A."

IV. Open/Close Procedures:

         a. Bismarck ATCT shall verbally coordinate with ZMP when opening and closing.
                  (ref. 7110.65 Ap. D Transfer of Position Responsibility, BIS 7110.65A Ap. B).

         b. During scheduled closures or in the event that control services cannot be
                  provided, delegated airspace and responsibilities shall revert to ZMP.

         c. The facility assuming control responsibilities shall obtain the status of equipment,
                  conditions, and procedures (including NOTAM's and weather) via the appropriate
                  Status Information systems.

         d. The facility divesting responsibilities shall brief the relieving controller on the
                  status of items not available via automated Status Information systems, and any
                  items of special interest calling for explanation, including airport conditions,
                  approach in use, equipment status, TMU initiatives, special activities, and traffic.

         e. Upon completion of the briefing, transfer control of all aircraft and release the
                  airspace to the receiving facility.
V. Radar Procedures:
         Unless otherwise coordinated, the following procedures shall apply:

         a. Radar handoffs between facilities are mandatory as depicted on Attachment "A."

         b. Arrivals/Over-flights:

                  (1) The clearance limit for arrivals shall be the destination airport.

                  (2) Arrivals shall be descending to or level at 8,000 feet MSL.

                  (3) When automated handoffs are in use:

                           (a) Acceptance of a handoff by BIS of an aircraft with Mode C
                                    readout in level flight at or below 15,000 feet MSL constitutes
                                    altitude approval on over-flight traffic and arrivals 7,000 feet MSL
                                    and below.

                  (4) After receiving a handoff from ZMP, BIS shall have control for descent
                           and/or control to alter the heading/route of an aircraft. The maximum turn
                           shall not exceed 30 degrees either side of the aircraft's ground track.

         c. Departures:

                  (1) BIS may issue en route departure clearances to aircraft without ZMP
                           approval provided the following conditions are met:

                           (a) Departures are cleared to 15,000 feet MSL or below.

                           (b) BIS shall inform aircraft restricted below their requested altitude
                                    to, "Expect (requested altitude) 10 minutes after departure."

                           (c) After ZMP has accepted the handoff, BIS shall ensure the aircraft
                                    is at or climbing to the requested altitude or FL230, whichever is
                                    lower. (ZMP shall advise BIS when an altitude different from that
                                    stated above is to be assigned before accepting the handoff.)

                           (d) After receiving a handoff from BIS, ZMP may alter the
                                    heading/route of the aircraft. The maximum turn shall not exceed
                                    30 degrees either side of the aircraft's ground track.
VI. General:
         Unless otherwise coordinated, the following procedures shall apply:
         a. When BIS is not operational or conditions render it incapable of providing Air
                  Traffic service, delegated control and airspace shall revert to ZMP.

VII. Military Training Routes:
         a. Aircraft using IR644, depicted on Attachment "A", shall be transferred using non-
                  radar procedures. Radar handoffs may be used if non-radar is deemed
                  unnecessary.
         b. BIS and ZMP need not advise the other when the aircraft is in/out of the
                  respective facility's assigned airspace, as would normally be expect in accordance
                  with non-radar procedures.
         c. ZMP shall forward to Bismarck Approach an estimated time for Point "R."
         d. BIS shall make the frequency change to Minneapolis Center at Point "V."

Dhruv Kalra
Air Traffic Manager
Minneapolis ARTCC, VATSM
ATTACHMENT "A"
