SUBJ: Flight Progress Strip (FPS) Handling Procedures

          This document establishes procedures for handling aircraft flight progress strips at Unrestricted
Airport Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) and Federal Contract Tower (FCT) facilities within the Salt Lake City
ARTCC on VATSIM (vZLC). Controllers are required to be familiar with the provisions of this document
and to exercise their best judgment if they encounter situations not covered by it. The provisions and
procedures described herein are supplemental to vZLC Facility Policy and FAA Order JO 7110.65.

          The information contained herein is to be used for flight simulation purposes only on the VATSIM
network. It is not intended, nor should it be used for real-world navigation. The Virtual Salt Lake City
ARTCC is not affiliated with the FAA, the actual Salt Lake City ARTCC, or any governing aviation body.

Harry Linsenmayer
Air Traffic Manager
Salt Lake City ARTCC

Evan McSweeny
Deputy Air Traffic Manager
Salt Lake City ARTCC
Version   Record of Changes       Effective Date Issued By

7210.3A  Description              11/01/2024  HL

         Initial Release

         Not for real world use.
                              Table of Contents

Chapter 1. Administrative                                       1

Section 1. Introduction                                         1

1-1-1. Purpose                                                  1

1-1-2. Audience                                                 1

1-1-3. Distribution                                             1

1-1-4. Cancellation                                             1

Section 2. Supplements                                          2

1-2-1. Requirements                                             2

1-2-2. Facilities with a Radar Aid                              2

1-2-3. Facilities without a Radar Aid                           2

Chapter 2. IFR Flight Progress Strips                           3

Section 1. FPS Marking                                          3

2-1-1. Flight Strip Printer                                     3

2-1-2. Approved Contractions                                    3

2-1-3. Flight Progress Strip                                    4

2-1-4. Departure Strip Marking                                  4

2-1-5. Arrival Strip Marking                                    5

Section 2. FPS Handling                                         6

2-2-1. Clearance Delivery (CD)                                  6

2-2-2. Ground Control (GC)                                      6

2-2-3. Local Control (LC)                                       6

Chapter 3. VFR Flight Progress Strips                           7

Section 1. Flight Plan Generation                               7

3-1-1. Class C                                                  7

3-1-2. Terminal Radar Service Area (TRSA)                       7

3-1-3. Class D                                                  7

3-1-4. Flight Plan Editor                                       7

Section 2. FPS Marking                                          9

3-2-1. Format                                                   9

3-2-2. Approved Contractions                                    9

3-2-3. Flight Progress Strip                                    9

3-2-4. Strip Marking                                            10

3-2-5. Example FPSs                                             11

Section 3. FPS Handling                                         13

3-3-1. Clearance Delivery                                       13

3-3-2. Ground Control                                           13

3-3-3. Local Control                                            13

                                       Not for real world use.
                                Chapter 1. Administrative

                                      Section 1. Introduction

1-1-1. Purpose
This document establishes procedures for handling aircraft flight progress strips at Unrestricted
Airport Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) and Federal Contract Tower (FCT) facilities within the Salt
Lake City ARTCC on VATSIM (vZLC).

1-1-2. Audience
All vZLC controllers and visitors contained within the vZLC and VATUSA roster.

1-1-3. Distribution
This document is authorized for unrestricted use and release and is available in the Resources
Section of the vZLC Website.

1-1-4. Cancellation
This document cancels Flight Strip Markings Directive, dated August 1, 2023.

Not for real world use.  1
                                     Section 2. Supplements

1-2-1. Requirements
All members listed on the vZLC roster that are authorized to control any Local Control, Ground
Control, and/or Clearance Delivery positions at facilities designated as "Unrestricted" in
accordance with the VATSIM Global Controller Administration Policy (GCAP) must adhere to the
provisions contained herein.

NOTE-
Individual facility SOPs take precedence over this document. Should any contradiction appear in
an individual facility's SOP, those clauses contained in the SOP must be adhered to.

1-2-2. Facilities with a Radar Aid
The following Unrestricted facilities are equipped with a radar aid:

    a. Billings ATCT (BIL)
    b. Boise ATCT (BOI)
    c. Bozeman FCT (BZN)
    d. Great Falls ATCT (GTF)
    e. Hill AFB (HIF)
    f. Missoula FCT (MSO)
    g. Mountain Home AFB (MUO)
    h. Ogden FCT (OGD)
    i. Provo FCT (PVU)

1-2-3. Facilities without a Radar Aid
The following Unrestricted facilities are not equipped with a radar aid:

    a. Glacier Park FCT (GPI)
    b. Helena ATCT (HLN)
    c. Idaho Falls FCT (IDA)
    d. Jackson Hole FCT (JAC)
    e. Pocatello FCT (PIH)
    f. Hailey FCT (SUN)
    g. Twin Falls ATCT (TWF)

Not for real world use.  2
                         Chapter 2. IFR Flight Progress Strips

                                     Section 1. FPS Marking

2-1-1. Flight Strip Printer
All IFR FPSs must be printed using the Flight Strip Printer.

NOTE-
1. Arrival FPSs will only automatically print at facilities without a radar aid.
2. For facilities with a radar aid, arrival FPSs must not be used unless otherwise required
through a facility SOP or an operational necessity exists.

2-1-2. Approved Contractions
The following approved contractions, listed in Table 2-1-1, may be utilized when marking FPSs.

                                  Table 2-1-1. IFR FPS Approved Contractions

                         Contraction           Location/Meaning
                               TR                 Terminal Ramp
                               GA
                               CR            General Aviation Ramp
                               HP                   Cargo Ramp
                               WX                      Helipad
                               GS
                                                Weather Onboard
                             EDCT                   Ground Stop
                              CFR
                               MA     Expect Departure Clearance Time
                               LA                 Call for Release
                               TG
                               SG          Planned Missed Approach
                               OH                  Low Approach
                                                   Touch-and-Go
                                                    Stop-and-Go

                                               Overhead Maneuver

NOTE-
Additional approved contractions may be listed in facility SOPs.

Not for real world use.                                                3
2-1-3. Flight Progress Strip
Figures 2-1-1 and 2-1-2 identify box locations for various types of IFR FPSs.

                                          Figure 2-1-1. IFR Departure FPS

                         Figure 2-1-2. IFR Arrival FPS

2-1-4. Departure Strip Marking
Write data into the boxes of IFR Departure FPSs, depicted in Figure 2-1-1, in accordance with
the following:

    a. Boxes A-L: Automatically printed by the Flight Strip Printer.
    b. Box 1: Clearance contraction. Write "PDC" if the aircraft has successfully been issued a

         departure clearance through vTDLS or a check mark if the aircraft has been verbally
         issued a clearance with a correct readback.

         NOTE-
         1. A check mark () is inserted by pressing Shift + / (?).
         2. BOI ATCT is the only Unrestricted facility with the ability to issue PDC clearances.

    c. Box 2: Aircraft location. Write the location of the aircraft or the taxiway that the aircraft
         will enter the movement area at.

    d. Box 3: ATIS. Write the letter of the ATIS information that has been reported by the pilot. If
         no ATIS is active, or the facility does not have the ability to broadcast an ATIS, "WX" may
         be written.

    e. Box 4: TMI contraction. Write "GS" when the aircraft's arrival airport is placed under a
         ground stop. Write "EDCT" when the aircraft has been assigned an EDCT.

    f. Box 5: Release required. Write "CFR" when the aircraft requires a departure release.
    g. Box 6: Release time. Write the time at which the aircraft is released if an EDCT has been

         assigned or a departure release has been issued. The time may be abbreviated to the
         two-digit time in minutes only if the release time is within the same hour as the time of
         marking the FPS.
    h. Box 7: Assigned runway. Utilize an asterisk (*) to the right of the runway number if the
         runway is not designated as an active runway.
    i. Box 8: Runway intersection. If other than full length, write the intersection of the runway
         the aircraft will depart from. Otherwise, leave blank.

Not for real world use.                                                        4
2-1-5. Arrival Strip Marking
Write data into the boxes of IFR Arrival FPSs, depicted in Figure 2-1-2, in accordance with the
following:

    a. Boxes A-K: Automatically printed by the Flight Strip Printer.
    b. Box 1: Approach termination. If other than full-stop, write the aircraft's intended approach

         termination.
    c. Box 2: Parking location. Write the parking location of the aircraft or the taxiway that the

         aircraft will exit the movement area at.
    d. Box 3: Reporting point. Write the first three characters of the non-radar reporting point

         for the IAP the aircraft is conducting.

         NOTE-
         Reporting points can be found in individual facility SOPs.

    e. Boxes 4-5: Must be left blank, unless otherwise specified in an individual facility SOP.
    f. Box 6: Reporting time. Write the time that the aircraft reports over the reporting point

         specified in Box 3.

         NOTE-
         The time must be abbreviated to the two-digit time in minutes.

    g. Boxes 7-9: Must be left blank, unless otherwise specified in an individual facility SOP.

Not for real world use.  5
                                     Section 2. FPS Handling

2-2-1. Clearance Delivery (CD)
    a. When a Departure FPS is received through Flight Strip Printer, CD must move the strip
         to their strip bay.
    b. CD must mark Boxes 1-6 on all IFR Departure FPSs in accordance with paragraph
         2-1-4.
    c. Upon completion of FPS preparation and after a departure clearance has been issued,
         forward the aircraft's FPS to Ground Control.

         NOTE-
         Only select facilities have a separate CD position. For facilities that have CD combined
         with Ground Control, the above procedures must be assumed by Ground Control.

2-2-2. Ground Control (GC)
    a. GC must coordinate with CD prior to removing a Departure FPS from any CD strip bay.
    b. Departure FPSs must be pushed to the appropriate LC strip bay and sequenced to
         reflect their actual sequence on the taxiway.
    c. GC must ensure FPS markings are updated prior to pushing a Departure FPS to LC.

2-2-3. Local Control (LC)
    a. Departure FPSs must be sequenced in the appropriate bay for the runway of departure
         and must reflect the order in which the aircraft will depart.
    b. Arrival FPSs must be sequenced in the appropriate bay for the runway of arrival and
         must reflect the order in which the aircraft will arrive.
    c. Departure FPSs may be deleted when all conflicts are resolved and the aircraft has been
         instructed to contact departure.
    d. Ensure Box 2 of Arrival FPSs are updated prior to pushing the FPS to GC.

         NOTE-
         Box 2 must only be updated if the aircraft informs LC of their parking location.

Not for real world use.  6
                       Chapter 3. VFR Flight Progress Strips

                              Section 1. Flight Plan Generation

3-1-1. Class C
All VFR departure aircraft must have a flight plan generated through the Flight Plan Editor or via
the STARS VP function.

3-1-2. Terminal Radar Service Area (TRSA)
All VFR departure aircraft must have a flight plan generated through the Flight Plan Editor, or via
the STARS VP function, unless the pilot specifically requests to not receive TRSA services.

3-1-3. Class D
    a. All VFR departure aircraft that have not requested flight following must not have a flight
         plan generated.
    b. All VFR departure aircraft that have requested flight following must have a flight plan
         generated through the Flight Plan Editor or via the STARS VP function.

         NOTE-
         Flight Following must not be given on the ground at facilities without a radar aid.

3-1-4. Flight Plan Editor
When generating VFR flight plans through the Flight Plan Editor, the following items must be
filled out:

    a. Aircraft type code (TYP).
    b. Departure airport (DEP).
    c. Arrival airport (DEST), if provided.
    d. Requested altitude (ALT). Fill out this box in accordance with the following:

              (1) "VFR" must precede any numerical entry.
              (2) If a requested altitude is provided, enter the altitude in hundreds of feet after a

                   forward slash succeeding the phrase "VFR."

                   EXAMPLE-
                   1. VFR
                   2. VFR/075

    e. Direction of flight, type of departure, or request (RTE). Fill out this box in accordance
         with the following:
              (1) Aircraft that will depart LC airspace must have entries placed between forward
                   slashes.
                        (a) If flight following is requested, write "FF" followed by the cardinal direction
                             letter.
                        (b) If flight following is not requested, write the cardinal direction letter.

Not for real world use.  7
              EXAMPLE-
              1. /N/
              2. /SW/
              3. /FFNE/

(2) Aircraft remaining within LC airspace must have simple explanatory entries
    spelled out.

    EXAMPLE-
    1. "PATTERN"
    2. "SIGHTSEEING"
    3. "PHOTOSHOOT"

Not for real world use.                                                         8
                                     Section 2. FPS Marking

3-2-1. Format
All VFR FPSs must be handwritten on a half-strip.

3-2-2. Approved Contractions
The following approved contractions, listed in Table 3-2-1, may be utilized when marking FPSs.

                                 Table 3-2-1. VFR FPS Approved Contractions

                         Contraction            Location/Meaning
                               TR                  Terminal Ramp
                               GA
                               CR            General Aviation Ramp
                               HP                   Cargo Ramp
                               WX                       Helipad
                               MA
                               FS                Weather Onboard
                               LA          Planned Missed Approach
                               TG
                               SG                      Full-Stop
                               OP                  Low Approach
                                                   Touch-and-Go
                              LDG                   Stop-and-Go

                               OH                       Option
                             TRSN     Landing at Helipad/Non-Movement

                                              Area (Rotorcraft only)
                                               Overhead Maneuver
                                              Transitioning Airspace

NOTE-
Additional approved contractions may be listed in facility SOPs.

3-2-3. Flight Progress Strip
Figure 3-2-1 identifies box locations for VFR FPSs.

Not for real world use.                                                9
                         Figure 3-2-2. VFR FPS (Half-Strip)

3-2-4. Strip Marking
Write data into the boxes of Half-Strips, depicted in Figure 3-2-2, in accordance with the
procedures below. All boxes are always required except Box F.

    a. Box A: Callsign.
    b. Box B: Aircraft type. Equipment suffix is not required.
    c. Box C: Operation type. Write the type of operation that the aircraft has requested or

         been cleared for.

         NOTE-
         1. For departure aircraft, refer to the examples listed below. For arrivals, utilize
         contractions listed in Table 3-2-1.
         2. The operation type must be continually updated as aircraft are cleared for different
         operations.

         EXAMPLE-
         1. "Northbound"
         2. "Southeast"
         3. "FF Westbound"
         4. "Pattern"
         5. "Practice Apchs"

    d. Box D: Assigned runway and intersection. Utilize an asterisk (*) to the right of the runway
         number if the runway is not designated as an active runway. If the aircraft will depart
         from an intersection, write the intersection of the runway the aircraft will depart from after
         the assigned runway. Separate the assigned runway and runway intersection with a
         forward slash.

         NOTE-
         If LC switches the aircraft to another runway in the air or on the ground, they must keep
         this box up to date.

         EXAMPLE-
         1. "13"
         2. "28R/D"

Not for real world use.                                      10
    e. Box E: ATIS and beacon code. Write the letter of the ATIS information that has been
         reported by the pilot. If no ATIS is active, or the facility does not have the ability to
         broadcast an ATIS, "WX" may be written. Write the beacon code the aircraft has been
         assigned, if applicable. Separate the ATIS letter from a beacon code with a forward
         slash.

         EXAMPLE-
         1. "W"
         2. "WX"
         3. "D/0052"

    f. Box F: Clearance marking and altitude restriction. If departure clearance instructions are
         issued with a correct readback, write a check mark. If an altitude restriction has been
         assigned, write the letter A followed by the assigned altitude in hundreds of feet.
         Separate the clearance marking from an altitude restriction with a space.

         NOTE-
         If the phrase "at or below" is not used when imposing an altitude restriction, the letter A
         preceding the altitude assignment must be omitted.

         EXAMPLE-
         1. " A045"
         2. " 055"

3-2-5. Example FPSs
Examples of VFR FPSs may be found below.

Not for real world use.  11
Not for real world use.  12
                                     Section 3. FPS Handling

3-3-1. Clearance Delivery
    a. CD must mark Boxes A, B, C, and F on all VFR FPSs in accordance with paragraph
         3-2-4. If applicable, CD must also mark Box E.
    b. Upon completion of FPS preparation and after a departure clearance has been issued,
         forward the aircraft's FPS to GC.

         NOTE-
         Only select facilities have a separate CD position. For facilities that have CD combined
         with GC, the above procedures must be assumed by GC.

3-3-2. Ground Control
    a. At facilities with a separate CD position, GC must not issue VFR clearances.

         NOTE-
         Taxi instructions do not count as VFR clearances. At Class D airports (not including
         TRSA) with a separate CD position, aircraft that have not requested flight following are
         not required to contact CD. In this case, GC must be responsible for the creation of the
         aircraft's FPS.

    b. Departure aircraft FPSs must be pushed to the appropriate LC strip bay and sequenced
         to reflect their actual sequence on the taxiway.

    c. GC must ensure FPS markings are updated prior to pushing a FPS to LC.

3-3-3. Local Control
    a. Departure aircraft FPSs must be sequenced in the appropriate bay for the runway of
         departure and must reflect the order in which the aircraft will depart.
    b. Arrival aircraft FPSs must be sequenced in the appropriate bay for the runway of arrival
         and must reflect the order in which the aircraft will arrive.
    c. Departure aircraft FPSs may be deleted when the aircraft has exited LC airspace and/or
         instructed to contact departure.
    d. Arrival aircraft FPSs may be deleted once the aircraft has cleared the runway and has
         been instructed to contact GC. LC need not push arrival aircraft FPSs to GC.

Not for real world use.  13
