                                           Clearance

1. Frequency
         (1) Ogden Ground: 121.700

2. Procedures
         (1) When appropriate, inform pilots of the current ATIS information prior to contacting
              ground control.

3. IFR Routing
         (1) Initial Altitude: 9,000
         (2) Issue radar vectors for all departure aircraft, except when the pilot requests the
              EMONT ODP.
              Note-VCOA available for RWY 3 on the EMONT ODP. VCOA must never be
              solicited by controllers.
         (3) Issue the following headings for radar vectors to their route, per the departure
              runway:
                   (a) Runway 3/35 - Heading 280
                   (b) Runway 21 - Heading 210

4. Standard Departure Frequencies
         (1) When appropriate, issue the following frequencies to IFR aircraft:
                   (a) Salt Lake Approach (Hart Sector) 121.1
         (2) When appropriate, issue the following frequencies to VFR aircraft requiring radar
              services after departure:
                   (a) Salt Lake Approach (Hart Sector) 121.1

5. VFR Routing
         (1) VFR aircraft wanting to transit the HIF Class Delta are to request the Mountain
              Road Transition

                                    Ground

1. Frequency
         (1) Ogden Ground: 121.700
2. Airspace
         (1) Ground: All movement areas except active runways.

3. Procedures
         (1) Not applicable.

4. Departures
         (1) All aircraft requiring pushback onto the movement area will contact ground prior
              to pushback and start-up.
         (2) All aircraft will contact ground with position and ATIS prior to being issued taxi
              instructions.

5. Arrivals
         (1) All aircraft will remain on ground frequency until off the movement area.

                                              Local

1. Frequency
         (1) Ogden Tower: 118.700

2. Airspace
         (1) Local: Runway 3/21, 17/35, and OGD Class D airspace.

3. Procedures
         (1) Runway operations
                   (a) Use runway 3 (East) during calm wind operations.
                   (b) Use runway 21 (West) when the tailwind component exceeds 5 knots.
         (2) LAHSO
                   (a) Land and Hold Short Operations (LAHSO) are only permitted for Landing
                        Runway 21 with an instruction to hold short of Runway 17/35 if all of the
                        following apply:
                           (i) Daylight hours.
                          (ii) The local weather is reported as at least 3 miles visibility and a
                                  1,000' ceiling.
                         (iii) The Available Landing Distance from the landing threshold to the
                                  hold short point is dry.

                         (iv) The tailwind is less than 3kts.

                          (v) The most recent Wind Shear was reported greater than 20 min
                                  ago.

                         (vi) An advisory is broadcast via the ATIS or pilot is advised on initial
                                  contact: "Land and Hold Short Operations are in effect."

                        (vii) When issued a Land and Hold Short instruction, the landing
                                  runway and the hold short point must be acknowledge by the pilot
                                  in the readback.

                        (viii) Traffic on a crossing runway holding in position must be advised
                                  and an acknowledgement received from that aircraft.

                         (ix) Landing or departing aircraft on the same runway beyond the hold
                                  short point is not authorized. Aircraft/vehicles must be allowed to
                                  cross the portion of the runway surface beyond the hold short
                                  point.

                          (x) No more than one hold short operation must be conducted on the
                                  same runway at any one time.

                         (xi) LAHSO is not authorized for experimental aircraft.

                   (b) Aircraft landing on Runway 21 and instructed to hold short of Runway
                        17/35 has an available landing distance of 4,600.

         (3) Tower Use of Radar:

                   (a) Full

4. Departures

         (1) Departure Notification / Releases

                   (a) A "Release Request" (.RR) is required to be sent to the appropriate
                        Departure Controller for all departing aircraft in accordance with the
                        General Control Directive.

5. Arrivals

         (1) IFR Arrivals

                   (a) N/A

         (2) Missed Approach/Go Around
                   (a) Send a Missed Notification (.MA) for the aircraft executing an unplanned
                        Missed Approach/Go Around to the appropriate TRACON sector that will
                        be receiving the aircraft for re-sequencing.

                   (b) VFR aircraft, and/or IFR Category I/II aircraft conducting a visual
                        approach and executing a Go-Around must be instructed to remain in the
                        local pattern, if capable of doing so.

                   (c) The following is considered Primary Climb-Out procedure and does not
                        require any special coordination with Approach Control or Strip marking
                        (Scratchpad entries) other than the basic Missed Notification. Aircraft
                        must not turn prior to the departure end of the runway. Comm-Change to
                        the appropriate TRACON sector must be completed no later than 1 mile
                        off the departure end of the runway.

                   (d) CLIMB OUT PROCEDURE:

                           (i) North Flow: Heading 280, Maintain 9,000.

                          (ii) South Flow: Heading 210, Maintain 9,000.

                   (e) VFR traffic join local pattern.

6. VFR Operations

         (1) VFR Departures

                   (a) Depart on-course, remain clear of the HIF Delta Airspace.

                   (b) Comm change to departure control as soon as clear of any possible
                        conflicts.

                           (i) Salt Lake Approach (Hart Sector) 121.1

         (2) VFR Arrivals

                   (a) Direct to airport, remain clear of the HIF Delta Airspace.

         (3) VFR Flight Following

                   (a) Ensure all aircraft requiring flight following have the appropriate
                        scratchpad entry prior to comm change to departure.
