SUBJ: GPI FCT Standard Operating Procedures

  This document establishes the Glacier Park Airport Federal Contract Control Tower (GPI FCT)

Standard Operating Procedures within the Salt Lake City ARTCC on VATSIM (vZLC). Controllers are

required to be familiar with the provisions of this document and to exercise their best judgment if they

encounter situations not covered by it. The provisions and procedures described herein are supplemental

to vZLC Facility Policy and FAA Order JO 7110.65.

  The information contained herein is to be used for flight simulation purposes only on the VATSIM

network. It is not intended, nor should it be used for real-world navigation. The Virtual Salt Lake City

ARTCC is not affiliated with the FAA, the actual Salt Lake City ARTCC, or any governing aviation body.

Cameron Negrete
Air Traffic Manager
Salt Lake City ARTCC

Adam Earl
Facilities Engineer
Salt Lake City ARTCC
Version          Record of Changes      Effective Date Issued By

7110.8A           Description           Mar 19, 2026  AE

         Initial Release In New Format

         Not for real world use.
                                    Table of Contents

Chapter 1. Standard Operating Control Procedures             1

Section 1. Introduction                                      1

1-1-1. Purpose                                               1

1-1-2. Audience                                              1

1-1-3. Distribution                                          1

1-1-4. Cancellation                                          1

Section 2. Operational Positions                             2

Section 3. Intrafacility Coordination Procedures             3

1-3-1. Runway Configurations                                 3

1-3-2. Changing Runway Configurations                        3

1-3-3. ATIS                                                  3

Section 4. Opposite Direction Operations (ODO)               4

1-4-1. General                                               4

1-4-2. Responsibilities                                      4

1-4-3. IFR Aircraft Procedures                               4

1-4-4. VFR Aircraft Procedures                               5

Chapter 2. Operational Positions                             6

Section 1. Ground Control (GC)                               6

2-1-1. Position Responsibilities                             6

2-1-2. Area of Jurisdiction                                  6

2-1-3. IFR Departure Instructions                            6

2-1-4. VFR FF Departure Instructions                         6

2-1-5. Traffic Flow                                          7

2-1-6. Control of Runway 12/30                               7

2-1-7. ATIS                                                  7

2-1-8. Pushback Clearances                                   7

Section 2. Local Control (LC)                                8

2-2-1. Position Responsibilities                             8

2-2-2. Area of Jurisdiction                                  8

2-2-3. Departures                                            8

2-2-4. Approaches/Arrivals                                   8

2-2-5. Tower Procedures                                      9

2-2-6. Center Coordination                                   9

Appendix 1. Local Control Airspace                           10

                                    Not for real world use.
              Chapter 1. Standard Operating Control Procedures

                                      Section 1. Introduction

1-1-1. Purpose
This document establishes the Glacier Park Federal Contract Control Tower (GPI FCT)
Standard Operating Procedures within the Salt Lake City ARTCC on VATSIM (vZLC).

1-1-2. Audience
All vZLC controllers and visitors contained within the vZLC and VATUSA roster.

1-1-3. Distribution
This document is authorized for unrestricted use and release and is available in the Resources
Section of the vZLC Website.

1-1-4. Cancellation
This document cancels the GPI SOP, effective July 25, 2025.

Not for real world use.                    1
                                Section 2. Operational Positions

                           Table 1-2-1. GPI FCT Operational Positions Table

   Sector/Position           STARS ID  VATSIM Callsign                         Frequency
Ground Control (GC)              N/A       GPI_GND                               121.600
                                                                                 124.550
 Local Control (LC)            N/A       GPI_TWR

                             Bold designates a primary position.

Not for real world use.                                                                   2
                    Section 3. Intrafacility Coordination Procedures

1-3-1. Runway Configurations
The active runway configuration refers to the general cardinal direction of departures and
arrivals currently in use. Authorized runway configurations are listed in subparagraphs c. and d.

    a. When selecting a runway configuration, the following factors must be considered:
              (1) Wind direction.
              (2) Wind speed. The gust factor takes precedence over the constant wind speed.

    b. North Flow is designated as the "calm wind", runway configuration.
    c. North Flow: Landing and departing Runway 2. Runway 12 may be issued at pilot

         request.
    d. South Flow: Landing and departing Runway 20. Runway 30 may be issued at pilot

         request.

NOTE-
North Flow is to be used until a greater than five knot tailwind is observed

1-3-2. Changing Runway Configurations
The Local Control (LC) position is the final authority for selecting the runway configuration, but
coordination with GC and SLC CTR must be accomplished prior to changing the runway
configuration.

    a. LC must:
              (1) Coordinate with GC to determine which aircraft will be the last departure and
                   arrival in the old runway configuration.
              (2) Ensure that:
                        (a) The ATIS is updated to reflect the runway configuration change.
              (3) Notify ZLC ARTCC Sectors 12 and 20 (or other appropriate overlying sector) of
                   the runway configuration change.

1-3-3. ATIS
Regardless of the position broadcasting the ATIS, the following statements must be included on
the ATIS broadcast:

    a. During VFR weather conditions: "DEPARTING VFR AIRCRAFT ADVISE GROUND
         CONTROL OF REQUESTED HEADING OR DESTINATION."

    b. When the outside air temperature is 26°C or greater: "CHECK DENSITY ALTITUDE."

NOTE-
This statement must be made immediately after stating the altimeter setting.

Not for real world use.                    3
                    Section 4. Opposite Direction Operations (ODO)

1-4-1. General
Opposite Direction Operations consist of IFR/VFR operations conducted to the same or parallel
runway where an aircraft is operating in a reciprocal direction of another aircraft arriving,
departing, or conducting an approach.

NOTE-
Departing aircraft include aircraft conducting a touch-and-go, stop-and-go, low approach,
missed approach, or go-around.

1-4-2. Responsibilities
    a. LC and SLC CTR (Sector 12) share the responsibility to coordinate ODO and issue
         traffic advisories (see below).
    b. LC is responsible for applying the cutoff point between opposite direction arriving and
         departing aircraft.
    c. SLC CTR (Sector 12) is responsible for applying the cutoff point between opposite
         direction arrival aircraft.

1-4-3. IFR Aircraft Procedures
    a. General:
              (1) Traffic advisories must be issued to all ODO aircraft.

                   PHRASEOLOGY-
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC (distance) MILE FINAL, (type aircraft).
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC DEPARTING RUNWAY (number), (type
                   aircraft).
                   OPPOSITE DIRECTION TRAFFIC (position), (type aircraft).

              (2) VFR aircraft conducting practice approaches must receive IFR services.
              (3) Opposite direction, same or parallel runway, operations with opposing traffic

                   inside the cutoff point are prohibited.
              (4) Lateral separation must exist before any other type of separation is applied.
    b. Coordination:
              (1) LC must verbally request opposite direction departures with CTR.
              (2) CTR must verbally request opposite direction arrivals with LC.
              (3) Initial coordination must include callsign, type, and arrival/departure runway. The

                   phrase "opposite direction" must be used.
    c. Cutoff procedures for aircraft conducting ODO to the same runway:

Not for real world use.                    4
NOTE-
When both aircraft are receiving IFR services, visual separation is not authorized.

              (1) A departing aircraft must be airborne and have turned to avoid conflict prior to an
                   aircraft reaching:
                        (a) A point five flying miles from the threshold of the runway of intended
                             landing or, if an aircraft is established in the traffic pattern, prior to that
                             aircraft turning base leg.
                        (b) If the above conditions are not met, action must be taken to ensure
                             control instructions are issued to protect the integrity of the cutoff points.

              (2) An arriving aircraft must cross the runway threshold prior to an aircraft reaching:
                        (a) A point five flying miles from the threshold of the runway of intended
                             landing or, if an aircraft is established in the traffic pattern, prior to that
                             aircraft turning base leg.
                        (b) If the above conditions are not met, action must be taken to ensure
                             control instructions are issued to protect the integrity of the cutoff points.

    d. Cutoff procedures for aircraft conducting ODO to parallel runways:
              (1) Provide a turn away from the opposing arriving traffic before the arrival is inside
                   of the cutoff point to the other runway. The same cutoff points in subparagraph c.
                   must apply.

NOTE-
1. Visual separation of any type may be applied after the turn away from opposing traffic is
issued.
2. Prior to a pilot providing visual separation, a heading with at least 15° angular difference
between the aircraft's flight paths must be assigned to ensure flight paths do not cross.

1-4-4. VFR Aircraft Procedures
    a. Ensure VFR aircraft are issued a turn to avoid conflict with the opposing IFR/VFR traffic.
    b. During coordination, the phrase "opposite direction" must be used.
    c. LC must issue traffic information to both aircraft and indicate the direction that the
         departure will turn (arrival/departure ODO) or the location of the opposing aircraft on final
         (arrival/arrival ODO).

Not for real world use.                    5
                           Chapter 2. Operational Positions

                               Section 1. Ground Control (GC)

2-1-1. Position Responsibilities
    a. Monitor the GC frequency (121.600 MHz).
    b. Prepare, update, and mark flight progress strips in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip
         Handling Directive (7210.3).
    c. Issue departure clearances to IFR aircraft, complying with posted traffic management
         initiatives (TMIs), letters of agreement (LOAs), and published preferred routes.
    d. Handle VFR departure aircraft in accordance with paragraph 2-1-4.
    e. Ensure all taxiing aircraft have the current ATIS.
    f. Determine/finalize aircraft departure runway assignments.
    g. Assume other ground control or other cab responsibilities, as assigned.

2-1-2. Area of Jurisdiction
GC has jurisdiction of all movement areas except active runways. If LC releases control of
Runway 12/30 to GC (see paragraph 2-1-6), GC assumes control of that runway for taxi use
and crossings.

2-1-3. IFR Departure Instructions
Departing IFR aircraft must be assigned the following:

    a. In Both Flows (North & South)
             i. All RNAV-capable aircraft are to be issued the RIDDG SID
            ii. All Non-RNAV aircraft are to be issued the SKOTT ODP

NOTE-
If The Aircraft Filed The SKOTT ODP and is RNAV Capable You (The Controller) Are Not
Required To Change Them To The RIDDG SID.

    b. If a pilot cannot accept a departure procedure, issue the following headings for radar
         vectors to their route, per their departure runway:
             i. Runway 2 - Heading 020
            ii. Runway 12 - Heading 120
            iii. Runway 20 - Heading 200
            iv. Runway 30 - Heading 300

    c. An initial altitude of 12,000 feet, or lower cruising altitude if compliant with the MOCA.

2-1-4. VFR FF Departure Instructions
All VFR aircraft that requested flight following and will depart the Class D surface area must:

    a. Be issued both of the following:
              (1) Appropriate departure frequency.
              (2) Discrete beacon code.

Not for real world use.                    6
    b. Have the following filled out:
              (1) Flight Strip, in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip Handling Directive (7210.3).
              (2) Flight Plan.

NOTE-
Aircraft that depart the Class D surface area and are not requesting flight following are not to
have any of the above, except a filled out Half Strip.

2-1-5. Traffic Flow
GC must ensure all aircraft yield to aircraft exiting a runway, unless otherwise coordinated with
LC.

2-1-6. Control of Runway 12/30
Runway 12/30 must be under the jurisdiction of LC by default. However, it is common for LC to
release control of Runway 12/30 to GC when operationally advantageous. When GC requests
control of Runway 12/30, verbal coordination must be accomplished in accordance with the
following.

EXAMPLE-
To request control: "REQUEST CONTROL OF RUNWAY (number)."
To release control: "RUNWAY (number) RELEASED TO (position)."

2-1-7. ATIS
Ensure all departure aircraft have the current ATIS. If you have the VATIS BETA you're
encouraged to use Voice Recorded ATIS mode over the Automated Mode as this airport is not
listed as a D-ATIS airport.

2-1-8. Pushback Clearances
To the maximum extent possible, aircraft parked at the terminal ramp should push back within
the non-movement area.

Not for real world use.                    7
                                 Section 2. Local Control (LC)

2-2-1. Position Responsibilities
    a. Monitor the LC frequency (124.550 MHz).
    b. Provide control instructions to aircraft within the LC area of jurisdiction.
    c. Determine the appropriate runway configuration in accordance with paragraph 1-3-1.
    d. Sequence and separate departures and arrivals.
    e. Mark FPSs in accordance with the ZLC Flight Strip Handling Directive (7210.3).
    f. Assume other local control or other cab responsibilities, as assigned.

2-2-2. Area of Jurisdiction
LC has jurisdiction of the following:

    a. LC airspace, as depicted in Appendix 1.
    b. Runway 2/20.
    c. Runway 12/30, except when delegated to GC.

2-2-3. Departures
    a. IFR Departure Notification / Releases
             i. A "Release Request" (.RR) is required to be sent to the appropriate Departure
                   Controller for all departing aircraft in accordance with the General Control
                   Directive.
            ii. Release requests may also be verbally coordinated.
    b. VFR aircraft to unicom, unless the VFR has requested Flight Following and those go to
         the appropriate departure frequency.
    c. Main Departure Frequency
             i. Salt Lake Center (Sector 12) 127.025

2-2-4. Approaches/Arrivals
    a. Missed Approach/Go Around
             i. Send a Missed Notification (.MA) for the aircraft executing an unplanned Missed
                   Approach/Go Around to the appropriate Center sector that will be receiving the
                   aircraft for re-sequencing.
            ii. The following is considered a Primary Climb-Out procedure and does not require
                   any special coordination with Center or Strip marking other than the basic Missed
                   Notification. Aircraft must not turn prior to the departure end of the runway.
                   Handoff/Comm-Change to the appropriate Center sector must be completed no
                   later than 1 mile off the departure end of the runway.
    b. Climb Out Procedure:
             i. North Flow: Heading 020, Maintain 12,000.
            ii. South Flow: Heading 200, Maintain 12,000.
    c. VFR traffic joins the local pattern.

Not for real world use.                    8
2-2-5. Tower Procedures
    a. LAHSO.
             i. Not authorized.
    b. Tower Use of Radar:
             i. APRT System

2-2-6. APRT System
    a. The use of the APRT system as it is in real life isn't fully able to be simulated on the
         network. To mimic the use of APRT you "the controller" are able to use an external
         application such as VATSIM Radar, Vatglasses, the VATSPY Application, etc. You can
         access these applications through the browser tab in CRC to simulate APRT use in the
         tower.

2-2-7. Center Coordination
Salt Lake Center may provide radar traffic calls for Sun Valley Local control and will coordinate
them via discord landline. Sun valley tower shall then relay the radar traffic call to the aircraft via
the following phraseology.

PHRASEOLOGY
"Salt Lake Center advises traffic is at your <direction> and <distance>...."

Not for real world use.                    9
                           Appendix 1. Local Control Airspace

Not for real world use.                                            10
